Add USB host tutorial (#12)
bcmi-labs/arduino-pro-content: content/tutorials/portenta-h7/por-ard-usb/content.md

# Portenta H7 as a USB Host

It is possible to configure Portenta H7 to behave as a USB host in a way that we can connect peripherals such as keyboard or mouse to interact with the board. This way we could connect a keyboard to our portenta and input numbers or characters into our programs.

## What you will learn

-   How to configure the Portenta H7 as a USB host

> -   What type of peripherals can we connect and how

Reviewer: I removed this point as it was too obvious and added a better one. In my opinion the **Intro** and **What you will learn** are ready to go!

-   To write a small program that reads button presses from a keyboard

## Required hardware and software

-   Portenta H7 board (<https://store.arduino.cc/portenta-h7>)
-   USB C cable (either USB A to USB C or USB C to USB C)
-   USB C adapter (you can find [here](https://www.dustin.se/product/5011166993/travel-port-usb-c-total) the one we used for the tutorial)

> -   External keyboard

Reviewer: No luck so far. I am currently troubleshooting new bootloader. We will try again with the new update. It seems like the hub might not be compatible though...

![Select the Arduino Portenta H7 (M7 core) in the board selector.](assets/por_ard_usbh_select_board.png)

Then, open: File>Examples>USBHOST>KeyboardController

![Open the Keyboard Controller example.](assets/por-ard-usbh-keyboardController.png)

The **USBHost.h** library that is used in this example is a revamp of the classic Arduino **USBHost.h** library. This new version, among adapting the protocol to the USB newer versions, allows to connect devices through HUBs () USB adapters). For a better understanding about how the USBHost library works, it could be helpful for you to take a look at the Arduino [USBHost.h](https://www.arduino.cc/en/Reference/USBHost) library.

## 3. Detecting the keys from the keyboard

The example you have opened describes how the board will handle the connection with a keyboard, addressing the functionality of each one of the keys of it. In order to detect which one of the keys from the keyboard is pressed, you will need to modify and add some lines of code to the example.

> Let's start by removing the comment line ( `//` ) of the following line `.on_key = process_key` at the beginning of the code. By doing this, each time you press a key, the program calls the function that converts the data received from the keyboard from `HEX` to `char`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's start by removing the comment line ( `//` ) of the following line `.on_key = process_key` at the beginning of the code. By doing this, each time you press a key, the program calls the function that converts the data received from the keyboard from `HEX` to `char`.
By doing so, we will be able to work directly with the characters to detect which key has been pressed instead of using their HEX value.
```

This troubleshooting will guide you to find why the LEDs of your Portenta don't toggle when you press the keys on the keyboard, to do so, you will need some extra components such as:

* Arduino Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 board (or other Arduino board with at least two serial ports)
* USB cable to connect the extra board to the PC
* 3 jumper wires

To detect what the problem is about, we are going to send all the information about the USB peripheral (in this case the keyboard) through serial communication from Portenta to the Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 board. Once this info arrives to the Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 board, we will print it out through the Serial Monitor, which will allow us to debug what can be happening.

### 1. Connect the  Portenta to the Arduino MKR WiFi 1010

To connect thePortenta to the Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 board you will need connect the pins with Serial1 functionality (13RX and 14TX in both boards) between them as shown in the image below. Don't forget to connect as well the GNDs of the boards.

![Serial connection Portenta - Arduino MKR WiFi 1010.](assets/por_ard_usbh_portenta_to_mkr1010.png)

### 2. Program the Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 board

> To set up Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 board copy the following code, paste it into a new sketch file and name it **mkr1010_serial.ino**. Then upload it to the Arduino Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 board. Make sure you select **Arduino MKR WiFi 1010** as the board and the port to which the Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 is connected.

Author: ```suggestion
To set up Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 board copy the following code, paste it into a new sketch file and name it **mkr1010_serial.ino**. Then upload it to the Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 board. Make sure you select **Arduino MKR WiFi 1010** as the board and set the port to which the Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 is connected.
```

```cpp
char data;

void setup()
{
  Serial.begin(9600);
  Serial1.begin(115200);
}

void loop()
{

  if (Serial1.available())
  {
    data = Serial1.read();
    Serial.write(data);
  }
}
```

> ### 3. System schema connection

Author: ```suggestion
### 3. Connection Schema
```

> After connecting the Portenta board to the Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 and programmed your Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 board, the schema connection you have should be similar to the followint one:

Author: ```suggestion
After connecting the Portenta board to the Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 and programming your Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 board, the connection schema you have should be similar to the following one:
```

![Troubleshooting full connection schema.](assets/por_ard_usbh_full_connections_schema.png)

> ### 3. Open the Serial Monitor of the Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 board

Author: ```suggestion
### 3. Open the Serial Monitor of the Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 Board
```

> Once you have everythig connected, open the Serial Monitor and reset the Portenta. Afeter reseting the Portenta board, you should get in your Serial Monitor something similar to the following image:

Author: ```suggestion
Once you have everything connected, open the Serial Monitor and reset the Portenta. After resetting the Portenta board, your Serial Monitor should display something similar to the following image:
```

![Troubleshooting USB communication info.](assets/por_ard_usbh_serial_info.png) 

In the info received on the MKR WiFi 1010 board you should see some "Enabled" messages. It means that the Portenta recognise the different ports of your HUB. If you can see them, when you press any key of the keyboard, it should be printed on the Serial Monitor.

> If in the info received on the MKR WiFi 1010 board you see any "Disabled" message, it means that something went wrong in the comunication of HUB and the Portenta board, if this happen, try: 

Author: ```suggestion
If in the messages received on the MKR WiFi 1010 board you see any "Disabled" message, it means that something went wrong with the communication of the HUB and the Portenta board. If this happens try: 
```

> 1. Reset the portenta by pressing the Reset button. 

Author: ```suggestion
1. Reset the Portenta by pressing the reset button. 
```

2. Disconnect the Portenta board from the HUB (USB C adapter), disconnect the power from the HUB, connect the Portenta to the HUB and connect the power to the HUB.

> If after repeating several times this process your system still no working, it may happen that the HUB you are using is not compatible with the Portenta board and you will need a different HUB to test this tutoral.

Author: ```suggestion
If, after repeating this process several times, the connection still isn't working, the HUB you are using may not be compatible with the Portenta board and you will need a different HUB to complete this tutorial.
```

**Authors:** Jose Garcia   

> **Reviewed by:**   

Author: ```suggestion
**Reviewed by:** Sebastian Hunkeler    
```
